---
title: 1. Introduction
---

# {{ page.title }}

The OpenStreetMap project is growing at an enormous rate. Working
with the OSM data becomes increasingly difficult, because there
is just so much of it and because it gets more complex all the
time.

Osmium was developed as an answer to this challenge. After years
of developing software to work with OSM data in many programming
languages like Perl, Ruby, Java and even in XSLT, it became
evident that something more was needed to efficiently work with
these huge amounts of data. Processing speed was, of course, one
big issue here, but the other one is available memory. Data
processing tasks can be so much faster if their working set fits
into memory, that it makes sense to think about this. Because
Osmium is a C++ library it can make very efficient use of the
main memory on your computer. Primitive objects such as integers
and doubles, but also complex objects need only as much memory
as is really necessary. There is not much management overhead
needed in many cases, if the data structures are chosen carefully.

Osmium has been in continuous development since it was borne in
October 2010. And it has changed considerably over time. While
the basic premise, to write a low-level efficient OSM library,
is still true, it has become more and more powerful and at the
same time easier to use. Osmium has been in production use nearly
from day one, some parts of it have been ripped from earlier
production code. Osmium is not an academic exercise, but it is
used and it has shown its power many times. And while C++ might
not be the easiest programming language to learn and Osmium
might not be the easiest library to use, we try to make it as
simple as possible to work with it, as long as this doesn't
compromise efficiency too much.
        
## Header-only Library

Osmium is a header-only library, so there is nothing to compile
to build it. Just include the header files you need.

## The `osmium` Namespace

Everything in the Osmium library is in the `osmium` namespace or
in sub-namespaces. You'll likely encounter the `osmium::io` namespace
for everything related to [Input and Output] and the `osmium::geom` namespace
for geometry-related functionality, but there are some more. Do
not directly use anything in any sub-namespace called `detail`. Those
classes and functions are for internal use only.

## C++11

The current version of Osmium makes extensive use of the new facilities
provided by the C++11 standard. It will only work with current compilers and
libraries.

## License

The Osmium Library is available under the very liberal Boost Software License:

    Boost Software License - Version 1.0 - August 17th, 2003

    Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person or organization
    obtaining a copy of the software and accompanying documentation covered by
    this license (the "Software") to use, reproduce, display, distribute,
    execute, and transmit the Software, and to prepare derivative works of the
    Software, and to permit third-parties to whom the Software is furnished to
    do so, all subject to the following:

    The copyright notices in the Software and this entire statement, including
    the above license grant, this restriction and the following disclaimer,
    must be included in all copies of the Software, in whole or in part, and
    all derivative works of the Software, unless such copies or derivative
    works are solely in the form of machine-executable object code generated by
    a source language processor.

    THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
    IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
    FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, TITLE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT
    SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR ANYONE DISTRIBUTING THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE
    FOR ANY DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
    ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
    DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

This manual is available under the Creative Commons [Attribution-ShareAlike
License version 4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).

## Old Versions of Osmium

If you are stuck with older compilers or need to develop
using the older C++98 for some reason, you can have a look
at the older Osmium version. But it is quite different from
the current Osmium described in this manual.

The old Osmium is available from [GitHub](https://github.com/joto/osmium).

